Seasonal difference of a time series is
a series of changes from one season to
the next.
For monthly data,
our m term would be 12.
And the seasonal difference of any
period is the difference between itself
and 12 periods prior.
Such as between January 2016,
and January 2015.
The seasonal differencing
component allows us to account for
the value that was observed in
the same season one year earlier.
Looking at our Bates Hotel example,
bookings spiked in both the summer and
winter, and
our seasonal model can account for
that regularly occurring pattern.
Seasonal models can use non-seasonal
differencing, seasonal differencing, or
a combination of both.
Non-seasonal and
seasonal differencing are combined
the stationarize the series.
Let's take a closer look
at seasonal differencing.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
We'll start by imputing our
Bookings.xlsx data into Alteryx.
We can add a seasonal difference to the
end of the data set by using a multi-row
formula tool.
Remember, this is the difference
between the current and
previous seasonal period.
Since our data is monthly,
the seasonal difference would be between
a given period and 12 periods earlier.
Our results will show differences
between the same months of
previous years within the series.
We'll take the seasonal difference
instead of the first difference because
our data is seasonal.
In the multi-row formula configuration,
we'll create a new output field and
call it seasonal difference,
with double as the output type.
We'll set number of rows to 12.
This allows us to calculate
the difference 12 periods previous.
And lastly,
set values that don't exist to null.
Our expression will be bookings
minus row, minus 12 bookings.
Let's now take a look at the plot
of the seasonal difference.
As you can see, seasonal
differencing hasn't adjusted for
the effects of seasonality.
So it looks like we have to take a first
seasonal difference to correct for
seasonality before the data
set is stationary.
We'll attach another multi-row formula
tool to the first multi-row tool.
We'll create a new field called S,
first difference.
And the calculation will be seasonal
difference minus row minus one seasonal
difference.
Don't forget to set double as
the output type, and null for
values that don't exist.
Now we can add the TS plot tool and
plot S first difference.
After plotting the first
seasonal difference,
we can see that the series
has stationarized.
We can see this through our ACF and
PACF plots, as serial
correlation has now disappeared.
Let's save this workflow now, as we
will need it in the upcoming lessons.